---
title: Survey of Cripples in New York City (text)
layout: plain-text
draft: false
---
• SURVEY OF CRIPPLES IN NEW YORK CITY Recommendations AS TO THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE FOREGOING FUNCTIONS TO ASSOCIATIONS, SCHOOLS, HOSPITALS AND CLINICS I THAT there be created a central organization covering the city, to perform the following functions: 1. The keeping of identifying records of all cripples in the city. 2. Through the school Census Bureau, or through direct effort, the registration of all cripples and potential cripples of all ages. 3. To be resyonsible for the operation of a transportation syst<:; m, ar.d the 1lctermination as to what cases shall be transported. 4. Advise as to the fields in which various organizations can op~rat~ without uvt:rlapping. 5. Advise as to additional facilities needed, such as beds, schools, shops, etc. 6. Cooperation with city departments to the end that transportation be furnished, begging cripples be referred to the appropriate training and placement agencies, and needed census information be registered. 7. Approval of the distribution to various agencies of a joint fund for cripples. Manhattan, Bronx and Richmond II THE Association for the Aid of Crippled Children to be responsible, directly and indirectly, for the performance of the functions listed above under (a) to (i), as follows: (a) ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION. (b) PREVOCATIONAL TRAINING. (c) VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE. (d) MEDICAL AND SURGICAL TREATMENT. (e) CONVALESCING CARE. (f) CUSTODIAL CARE. (g) SOCIAL SERVICE. (h) HOME TREATMENT. (i) SUMMER OUTINGS. 8 SUMliARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS , III T BE Federation of Associations for Cripples and the Institute for Crippled and Disabled Men to cooperate in the performance of the functions listed above under (j) to (m), as follows: (j) VOCATIONAL TRAINING. (k) PLACElfENT IN EMPLOY1rfENT. (l) WORK IN HOME. (m) BRACES Alo.rn APPLIANCES. Brooklyn and Queens IV THE Committee on Crippled Children of the Brooklyn Bureau of Charities to act as agent of the central organization, and also undertake responsibility for the performance of the functions listed above under (j) to (m), as follows: U) VocATIO~AL TRAINING. (k) PLACEMENT IN EMPLOYMENT. (l) WORK IN HOl\fE. (m) BRACES AND APPLIANCES. V • THE Visiting Nurse Association of Brooklyn to be responsible, directly and indirectly, for the performance of the functions listed above under (a) to (i), as follows: (a) ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION. (b) PREVOCATIONAL TRAINING. (c) VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE. (d) MEDICAL AND SURGICAL TREATl\fENT. (e) CONVALESCING CARE. (f) CUSTODIAL CARE. (g) SOCIAL SERVICE. (h) HOl\lE TREATMENT. (i) SUIDIBR OUTINGS. VI THAT joint financing of at least the five organizations hereinbefore mentioned be provided for. • 9 • SOME SIGNIFICANT FINDINGS 1. That there are about 36,000 cripples in the city. 2. That of all cripples, about 50 per cent are under 16 years of age; that about 63 per cent became crippled before reaching the age of 16 years. 3. That nearly one-half of the cases discovered by the field canvass were not being treated; that there are in the city prob- • WHAT IS THE CRIPPLING PERIOD. OP LIPE? FINDINGS IN 727 CASES 37% C:Rl'PP1.'e.O Al=-T!:. ~ 16 'l~S OP PLE '///// AGE: ably about 1000 cases of poliomyelitis, Potts' disease and tuberculosis of the joints not yet diagnosed; that there are about 3700 cases with these diseases that have been diagnosed but have IO SOi\fE SIGNIFICANT FINDINGS ceased to attend clinics; that over 50 per cent of cripples are not known to any agency. 4. That very few cripples attend high school. 5. That there are enough operative beds and sufficient clinical facilities, but insufficient number of convalescent and custodial beds. 6. That in the social work for cripples there are portions of the field uncovered, and at the same time somewhat vague limits assigned to the work of various agencies . • II DETAILED STATEMENT WITH REGARD TO RECOMMENDATIONS, AND ARGUMENTS IN THEIR SUPPORT The Problem of the Cripple ELE11ENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION LEMENTARY and secondary education is more important, ~ if possible, for cripples than for a normal child. If a normal child be not educated, he at least can perform manual labor, and always be in a position to sell his services. A cripple must render a limited and specialized service which, in almost all cases, combines and requires a large element of intelligent application. Many cripples can perform little or no physical labor, but are unrestricted in work requiring knowledge and intelligence. A person crippled because of the loss of one or both legs can render as good service as a bookkeeper, stenographer, typist, and in various other occupations, as a person who is not thus handicapped. An education and vocational training are needed as a preparation. Elementary and secondary education should be conducted so far as possible by the Department of Education of the city, even in hospitals and custodial l1omes. In general, the function is reasonably well performed for the child residing at home. The educational processes are less satisfactory in hospitals and homes. PREVOCATIONAL TRAINING The average child can be allowed to come to maturity without much advice as to his vocation, with little danger but that he will choose a vocation reasonably well adapted to his ability and capacity. A cripple, on the other hand, is much more limited in his choice, and is not likely to be informed as to the vocations or the processes wherein he can be serviceable regardless of his handicap. It is important, therefore, that he be thrown in touch \.Vith those who are familiar with the kind of things that can be 12 DETAILED STATEl\fENT WITH REGARD TO RECOMlIBNDATIONS done by those handicapped by one or more of the great variety of handicaps produced by disease or modern commerce and industry. The advice and instruction in connection with prevocational training should be adjusted to the vocation which is subsequently to be chosen. , This function is but partially performed at the present time, and warrants fuller consideration and development on the part of the Department of Education. VOCATIONAL GUIDANCE Many crippled persons will not, or cannot, for a variety of reasons, avail themselves of any particular training for a vocation. It is important that they be advised as to the type of things which they can most readily perform without specialized training. There is a tendency on the part of some philanthropic citizens to organize movements to train children to make artificial flowers, beads, etc., and to offer to crippled children this work, without informing them of other trades and vocations, thus limiting their choice to the one or two things presented. Such a procedure must necessarily at times force upon children a vocation for which they are ill fitted, and deter them from entering into work for which they have ability and talent. These processes will naturally take place in connection with the Department of Education, with the Association for the Aid of Crippled Children cooperating, for children going directly from the public schools to work. For those taking a subsequent vocational training, and for adults, the guidance should be carried on by an organization or organizations doing vocational training. MEDICAL AND SURGICAL TREAT:l\IBNT Fortunately, New York City is reasonably ,veil equipped with orthopedic hospitals and clinics, served by competent surgeons. A person who attends these hospitals or clinics is likely to receive intelligent and adequate treatment and care. Of hospitals devoted exclusively to orthopedic work, there are 6 within the city limits, and a state institution at West Haverstraw. In these 7 institutions there are, or shortly will be, 928 beds. There are orthopedic services in 10 general hospitals within the city 13
