---
draft: false
layout: project-history
title: Project History
---

In January 2019, the New York youth activist group Teens Take Charge (TTC) came to Brooklyn College professor Jeanne Theoharis.  They had read her chapter on the history of the New York civil rights movement around school segregation in *A More Beautiful and Terrible History: The Uses and Misuses of Civil Rights History* and had previously invited her to join them for a public town hall on NYC’s enduring school segregation. This event, and conversations within TTC about how history mattered for their work, and about what histories were relevant to and needed by New York’s students today, were prompted in part by frustration. When TTC organizer and co-founder Nelson Luna chose the history of New York City schools and civil rights organizing in education as the focus of a major research project for school, he found few available resources and met resistance from his teachers.

<details class="mb-5"><summary>Read More</summary>

After the town hall, TTC wanted something bigger. Learning that history had been pivotal to how they understood the city and their place in it and what they were trying to do to expose and attack the city’s enduringly segregated and unequal schools.  But nearly all that they had learned in school about the civil rights movement and school segregation in particular had been focused on the South. They were dismayed that they had only been exposed to this NYC history through their own independent political education. It was essential for all students in NYC to understand and grapple with this history of segregation and struggle in New York.  People need to understand the long history of segregation in New York, the policies and arguments that have been used to justify and maintain it, and how people have challenged it. How can we get this into the New York City school curriculum, they asked? Can you help us do that?

As we talked, we realized that the key to the problem was that teachers hadn’t learned this history either. So we began to think about ways to help teachers. Brian Jones, then-Associate Director of Education at the Schomburg, Jeanne Theoharis, and Nelson Luna did an evening educational program for teachers in June 2019 at the Schomburg Center but realized that we needed to build something more substantive and easier to access like a website. We connected with Ansley Erickson, a historian and professor at Teachers College, and began to explore what we could create together. Part of what was needed were primary sources for teachers to use, clear usable context for them and a timeline to show what was happening in New York alongside other recognizable historic events.

Meanwhile Jessica Murray, a doctoral student at the CUNY Graduate Center had helped Theoharis design a teaching website around her biography of Rosa Parks. On top of her considerable skills in web design, Murray’s research looked at disability rights in New York City–and she too was seeing the need for educational resources that taught the history of ableism and disability rights struggles in New York.  What if we were to create a website that essentially provided a history of racial and disability segregation and struggle in New York City’s schools that synthesized the scholarship, provided dozens of primary sources in context, and embedded other sorts of historical tools, like oral histories and timelines? It would be like giving teachers a research course in this history that they could then take components to use in their courses.

We realized that the National Historic Publications and Records Commission had these amazing grants to assist with projects like these. So on a long shot, we applied and to our delight and amazement, we were funded—and we secured a substantial matching commitment from Teachers College Center on History and Education. We have been building this website since late 2019.
</details>

## Who did this work and how?

The core project team included the four co-directors and a group of three to five team members per year, most of whom were doctoral students at Teachers College and at other area institutions. Team members have diverse backgrounds as educators and/or activists, and research and/or teaching interests in racism, ableism, and struggles for justice in education. They brought a range of identities and life experiences to the project. They were hired as graduate assistants or consultants. Team members took on various and expanding aspects of the project, including conducting archival research, imagining lesson plans, facilitating community meetings, testing different ways to present primary sources, and writing supporting text for the sources.

<details class="mb-5"><summary>Read More</summary>

This core team received guidance and insight from monthly meetings with community advisors, who were people invited into this work by the co-directors because of their organizational affiliations (as members of youth organizations like IntegrateNYC and Teens Take Charge or adult advocacy groups like IncludeNYC or Black Deaf Advocates of New York), their relevant scholarly and public history work, or their experience as students, educators, or activists. Community advisors received an honorarium for their participation.

Monthly community meetings were a crucial space where collaborative conversation shaped project goals. Community meeting spaces provided the core team a place to review work in progress (including selected sources), discuss digital presentation, and share ideas for classroom engagement with them. Much of our discussion was about  the challenges of this work, like handling harmful language in primary sources and grappling with the voices that were hardest to identify in the archive but crucial for inclusion in the project. Commitments to center first-person narratives of disability, to insist on paired histories of oppression and resistance, and to guide teachers on the emotional power of historical materials on racism and ableism were goals and guidelines named and refined in community meetings.

Nearly all of the work of the project was conducted virtually, given the COVID-19 pandemic and to make the work more accessible to participants in different locations and with various access needs.

Because there is a robust published scholarship on activism against racism in education in New York City, multiple archival institutions and collections documenting this history, and project co-directors were most familiar with this history, we started here in Year 1. Youth activists whose efforts initiated this project were most familiar with and already engaged with these histories as well. Out of the first year’s work, we identified themes and topics that remain a focus in the site: the school boycotts, Black and Latina women’s educational activism, and systems and policies that foster segregation. We also got feedback on web interface designs, choosing to present primary sources with supporting text and in topical groups and sub-groups alongside timelines of primary sources and events.

{{< gallery >}}
- images/resi-1.jpg
  Project contributors at the Reimagining Education Summer Institute (RESI), 2023
- images/resi-2.jpg
  Pop-up exhibit at RESI 2023
- images/resi-3.jpg
  ""
{{</ gallery >}}

The second year of the project shifted its focus more squarely to histories of ableism and disability in NYC education and struggles for disability rights. Some team members cycled off and others joined, and new community advisors with more direct personal and professional experience with disability joined as well. Teens Take Charge co-founder Nelson Luna also joined the project as a team member.

The shape of scholarship on histories of disability shaped the work. As compared to research on racial segregation in New York City schools, there is more limited published scholarship on local histories of activism for disability rights in education (despite a vibrant theoretical and empirical conversation in Disability Studies and developing national and local historical accounts) and archival silences, especially around disabled individuals leading their own resistance. So did an awareness that the project needed to attend to disability as a distinct site of oppression and resistance, and as one that intersects with racial segregation, while also recognizing race and disability as co-constructed social categories. By the end of the second year’s work, we had identified ways to integrate disability history into the first year’s topics. We had conceptualized new while also conceptualizing topics that centered efforts to establish and improve educational programs for disabled students in New York City and on narratives of disabled people. We had also developed an ambitious vision for accessible texts available at different reading levels, in multiple languages, and available in audio.

In the third year, the project team focused on three areas to complete the work plan established at the end of year 2. We edited draft work and conducted new research and writing where needed for teaching topics that integrated histories of struggles for educational justice against racism and ableism in New York City. New team members who were veteran educators joined the team and developed lesson plans that would help guide or inspire teachers in bringing these histories and primary sources into the classroom.

We also identified goals for future work. We recognized the need for funding to achieve the most robust vision of web accessibility we had imagined, and wrote a grant proposal seeking that support. We also sought and received funding from HumanitiesNY for a pop-up exhibit offering an analogue introduction to this digital project, and from Teachers College Digital Futures Institute to produce short videos that highlight how different readers make sense of primary source documents from the past, in the context of their present.

As described above, this project developed through collaboration. That does not mean that the process or the product reflect full consensus among all contributors. We hope this work inspires others to further research and teaching about the histories of ableism, racism, and struggles against them in New York City’s schools.

A variety of recent and ongoing projects provided inspiring examples and guides for this work. [Learning for Justice’s Teaching Hard Histories](​​https://www.learningforjustice.org/frameworks/teaching-hard-history/american-slavery) project offered an example of naming and refining key concepts on the history of racism and enslavement. The [Digital Public Library of America’s Primary Source Sets](https://dp.la/primary-source-sets) gave examples of thematically-related primary sources. We drew on recent scholarship on [curricular frameworks](https://www.edweek.org/teaching-learning/opinion-author-interview-with-dr-gholdy-muhammad-cultivating-genius/2020/01), [teaching Black history](https://ed.buffalo.edu/black-history-ed/framework.html), and [teaching disability history](https://books.google.com/books/about/Undoing_Ableism.html?id=YSysDwAAQBAJ&source=kp_book_description). [Minimal computing](https://minicomp.github.io/wiki/) approaches to the display of historical artifacts, as in the [Jekyll theme Wax](https://minicomp.github.io/wax/), provided examples of sustainable web design. And work with students - including Teachers College graduate students in courses led by Ansley Erickson and high school students in classes at Wadleigh Secondary School for the Visual and Performing Arts, Columbia Secondary School, and Central Park East High School, and in pilot sessions with Teens Take Charge, gave examples of how various learners interacted with these materials.

</details>
